Roll the dice for ruby (#2655)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/ruby/getting-started.md

---
title: Getting Started

> description: Get telemetry for your app in less than 5 minutes!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Get telemetry from your app in less than 5 minutes!
```

such a way that [traces][], [metrics][] and [logs][] are emitted to the console.

## Prerequisites

Ensure that you have the following installed locally:

- MRI Ruby >= `3.0`, jruby >= `9.3.2.0`, or truffleruby >= 22.1
- [Bundler](https://bundler.io/)

{{% alert color="warning" %}} jruby only targets compatibility with MRI Ruby
2.6.8; which is EOL. This project does not officially support MRI Ruby 2.6.8,
and provides jruby support on a best-effort basis until the jruby project
supports compatibility with more modern Ruby runtimes.

truffleruby is tested, but support is best-effort at this time. {{% /alert %}}

## Example Application

The following example uses a basic [Sinatra](https://sinatrarb.com/)
application. If you are not using Sinatra, that's ok — you can use OpenTelemetry
Ruby with other web frameworks as well, such as Rails and Rack. For a complete
list of libraries for supported frameworks, see the
[regsitry](/ecosystem/registry/?component=instrumentation&language=ruby).

For more elaborate examples, see
[examples](/docs/instrumentation/ruby/examples/).

### Dependencies

To begin, set up a new Gemfile in a new directory:

> ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

bundle init
```

Now install Sinatra and Puma:

> ```console
> $ bundle add sinatra puma

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
bundle add sinatra puma
```

```

## Create the sample HTTP Server

Create a file `app.rb` and add the following code to it:

```ruby
require 'rubygems'
require 'bundler/setup'
require 'sinatra/base'

class App < Sinatra::Base
  set :bind, '0.0.0.0'
  set :port, 8080

  get '/rolldice' do
    (rand(6) + 1).to_s
  end

  run! if app_file == $0
end
```

Run the application with the following command and open
<http://localhost:80800/rolldice> in your web browser to ensure it is working.

> ```console
> $ ruby app.rb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
ruby app.rb
```

```

## Instrumentation

Install the `opentelemetry-sdk` and `opentelemetry-instrumentation-all`
packages:

> ```console
> $ bundle add opentelemetry-sdk opentelemetry-instrumentation-all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
bundle add opentelemetry-sdk opentelemetry-instrumentation-all
```

```

The inclusion of `opentelemetry-instrumentation-all` provides
[instrumentations][auto] for Rails, Sinatra, several HTTP libraries, and more.

The OpenTelemetry initialization needs to happen early in your application

> lifecycle. Perform this initialization as early as possible in the start-up

Reviewer 2: My only hesitation here is that the majority of our contributors, maintainers, and support requests are specifically around using OTel with Ruby On Rails. 

I suspect removing references to initializing Rails applications vs using Sinatra will increase our support requests for documentation from our user base. 

I would like to keep the reference to Rails initializers in the documentation in addition to the Sinatra example.

Reviewer 3: I would agree with this. While it's generally good to be as neutral as possible, I think we should keep mentioning Rails specifically because it's just so prominent in the world of Ruby.

Author: I initially wanted to build the sample app with rails but Sinatra appeared to be easier and less steps involved. I think there are 2 options:

- Replace sinatra with Rails
- Add a "Note" for the rails specific initalizers

I can do both, I lean towards the first, although it is a little bit more work

Reviewer 2: I think in most cases folks will be retrofitting into existing Rails apps, which is one reason our original docs where intended to be copy/paste modify and we didn't build an entire sample app. 

Of course if you have the bandwidth to put that together it will be most welcome.

I do realize that the goal here is to have a symmetric example, so I think the Sinatra app is pretty good. I really appreciate you adding this example in the docs. Thank you for doing that!

Author: I'll try to retrofit it into rails, let me see how far I get :)

Author: so... I reworked it and it's now rails, please give it another look, hope the things I did make sense, ruby is not a language I am fluent in ;-)

process.

Update the `app.rb` to contain the initialization of the OpenTelemetry SDK:

```ruby
require 'rubygems'
require 'bundler/setup'
require 'sinatra/base'
require 'opentelemetry/sdk'
require 'opentelemetry/instrumentation/all'

OpenTelemetry::SDK.configure do |c|
  c.service_name = 'roll-the-dice'
  c.use_all() # enables all instrumentation!
end

class App < Sinatra::Base
  set :bind, '0.0.0.0'
  set :port, 8080

  get '/rolldice' do
    (rand(6) + 1).to_s
  end

  run! if app_file == $0
end
```

The call `c.use_all()` enables all instrumentations in the `instrumentation/all`
package. If you have more advanced configuration needs, see [configuring
specific instrumentation libraries][config].

## Run the instrumented app

You can now run your instrumented app and have it print to the console for now:

> ```console
> $ env OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER="console" ruby app.rb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
env OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER="console" ruby app.rb
```

---
title: Getting Started
description: Get telemetry from your app in less than 5 minutes!
aliases: [/docs/instrumentation/ruby/getting_started]
spelling: cSpell:ignore truffleruby sinatra rolldice struct darwin Tracestate
spelling: cSpell:ignore tracestate
weight: 1
---

This page will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in Ruby.

You will learn how you can instrument a simple application automatically, in
such a way that [traces][], [metrics][] and [logs][] are emitted to the console.

## Prerequisites

Ensure that you have the following installed locally:

- MRI Ruby >= `3.0`, jruby >= `9.3.2.0`, or truffleruby >= 22.1
- [Bundler](https://bundler.io/)

> {{% alert color="warning" %}} jruby only targets compatibility with MRI Ruby

Reviewer: The alert should have a title:

```suggestion
{{% alert  title="Warning" color="warning" %}} `jruby` only targets compatibility with MRI Ruby
```

If you don't like "Warning" you can choose another title.

> 2.6.8; which is EOL. This project does not officially support MRI Ruby 2.6.8,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.6.8, which is EOL. This project does not officially support MRI Ruby 2.6.8,
```

> and provides jruby support on a best-effort basis until the jruby project
> supports compatibility with more modern Ruby runtimes.
> 
> truffleruby is tested, but support is best-effort at this time. {{% /alert %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and provides `jruby` support on a best-effort basis until the `jruby` project
supports compatibility with more modern Ruby runtimes.

While tested, support for `truffleruby` is on a best-effort basis at this time. {{% /alert %}}
```

## Example Application

> The following example uses a basic [Rails](https://rubyonrails.org//)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example uses a basic [Rails](https://rubyonrails.org/)
```

application. If you are not using Sinatra, that's ok — you can use OpenTelemetry
Ruby with other web frameworks as well, such as Sinatra and Rack. For a complete
list of libraries for supported frameworks, see the
[registry](/ecosystem/registry/?component=instrumentation&language=ruby).

For more elaborate examples, see
[examples](/docs/instrumentation/ruby/examples/).

### Dependencies

To begin, install rails:

```sh
gem install rails
```

> ## Create an application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create the application
```

Create a new api-only application called `dice-ruby` and change into the newly
created folder `dice-ruby`

```sh
rails new --api dice-ruby
cd dice-ruby
```

Create a controller for rolling a dice:

```sh
rails generate controller dice
```

This will create a file called `app/controllers/dice_controller.rb`. Open that
file in your preferred editor and update it with the following code:

```ruby
class DiceController < ApplicationController
    def roll
        render json: (rand(6) + 1).to_s
    end
end
```

Next, open the `config/routes.rb` file and add the following code:

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  get 'rolldice', to: 'dice#roll'
end
```

Run the application with the following command and open
<http://localhost:8080/rolldice> in your web browser to ensure it is working.

```sh
rails server -p 8080
```

If everything works fine you should see a number between 1 and 6 returned to
you. You can now stop the application and instrument it using OpenTelemetry.

> ## Instrumentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Instrumentation
```

package. If you have more advanced configuration needs, see [configuring
specific instrumentation libraries][config].

> ## Run the instrumented app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run the instrumented app
```

You can now run your instrumented app and have it print to the console for now:

```sh

> env OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER="console" rails server -p 8080

Reviewer: ```suggestion
env OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER=console rails server -p 8080
```
